# Naked Ear: Introduction to Tools and Techniques for Sound Art


## Description

This workshop is for artists and researchers wanting to become more
familiar with the potential of sound. Our focus will be on expanding our
understanding of sound in an environment. This requires a basic vocabulary
for talking about sound as a material, as well as the ability to make and
use tools for investigating and manipulating sound for creative purposes.

Our frame of reference will be Good Vibrations, a mobile listening kit that
allows =E2=80=9Cacoustic explorers=E2=80=9D to find the lesser audible soun=
ds in their
environment. By using hand- made microphones and amplifiers, listeners can
tune into the subtle vibrations

that usually go unnoticed. The project encourages listeners to reimagine
their sonic environment by playfully exploring the world through their ears.

The workshop will introduce participants to the world of sound art, while
providing techniques for making tools for creating these experiences. This
will include

the fabrication of hand-made microphones, speakers, and amplifiers for use
in installations, performances, and scientific research. The goal of the
workshop is

to take these tools into the field and use them for artistic investigation
and public engagement.

## Content

For the first session, students will be introduced to the sound art
practice. Examples of seminal and canonical works will be presented, giving
students a taste of potential projects. From there we will move onto
describing the basic physics and properties of sound. Our introduction will
end with an explanation of how sound is received through a microphone,
amplified with an amplifier, and sent through a speaker to produce audible
sound.

The rest of the workshop will consist of building a contact microphone, a
speaker and an amplifier. From there we will take our tools out into nearby
McCarren Park and amplify found sounds.

### Outline

**Session 1**

-  Hour 1: Introductions

- Overview of sound art

- Overview of physics of sound

- Overview of how micrphone, speaker, and amplifier work

-  Hour 2: Microphone

- Contact microphone build

-  Hour 3: Speaker

- Speaker build

-  Hour 4: Amplifier

- Amplifier build on breadboard

**Session 2**

- Hour 1:

- Amplifier build on PCB

- Hour 2:

- Placing amplifier in enclosure

- Hour 3:

- Exploring McCarren Park with listening kits

- Hour 4:

- Presentation of experiments

## Student Profile

Students do not need to have any electronic experience. Some soldering
experience is a plus but is not required. An expertise knowledge of sound
and how it works is also not required. A large part of the workshop is to
teach that to you! A strong curiosity and willingness to learn about sound
is the only basic requirement.

## What students get from your profile; software, materials to work

- One contact mic

- One speaker

- One amplifier

- One custom enclosure with custom pcb

- Reference material (excerpts from Electronic Music Handbook, David Dunn's
microphone PDF etc.)

## Pre requisites and preparation for the workshop

Things we will need in the studio for each student:

- Soldering station

- Solder

- Multimeter

- Wire

- Jumper wires

## Dates

09/12/2015 and 09/13/2015

## Price

~$150-175 a student (plus materials, TBD)

## Instructor short bio

Johann Diedrick makes installations, performances, and software that allow
people to activly participate in the production of sound. His work has been
exhibited internationally in numerous group exhibitions, conferences and
festivals, including the New Interfaces for Musical Expression (NIME)
conference in Daejeon and Seoul, Korea, the Invisible Places, Sounding
Cities conference in Viseu, Portugal, and the Dumbo Arts Festival in
Brooklyn, New York. He received his Masters in Professional Studies at the
Interactive Telecommunications Program (ITP) at Tisch School of the Arts at
New York University, focusing on sound art. During time at ITP he was a
researcher at the InterLab at the Yamaguchi Center for Arts and Media
(YCAM) in Yamaguchi, Japan. Afterwards he worked as an interactive software
developer at Qosmo in Tokyo, Japan. He is currently a software developer at
the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

## Instructor Links, website, social media

Website: http://www.johanndiedrick.com

Github: @jdiedrick

Twitter: @jdiedrick

Instagram: @johanndiedrick
